SECURITY PREFLIGHT OPERATIONS

Purpose and limits

Security preflight makes an explicit, read-only authorization and capability
check before repository-dependent security work. It distinguishes a requested
and verified capability from a capability that is not configured, and from a
failed check. It does not treat a skipped security scan as a passing scan.

This policy supports GitHub.com only. A local check requires the actual push
destination, supplied explicitly. It never infers a destination from origin,
the current directory, or whichever remote happens to exist. Unsupported or
ambiguous destinations fail closed. In GitHub Actions, GITHUB_REPOSITORY is the
automatic repository context; no Git remote inference is needed.

Entry points

Local, through the package command:

  bun run ci:preflight -- --remote-name NAME --remote-url URL

The local package command executes the canonical Civet source through Bun:

  bun --preload @danielx/civet/bun-civet scripts/ci/security-preflight.civet local --remote-name NAME --remote-url URL

Replace NAME and URL with the actual Git push remote name and destination URL.
The pre-push hook supplies Git's remote-name and destination-URL arguments to
the local adapter. Do not substitute origin merely because it exists.

Hosted workflows use one of these explicit scopes:

  node scripts/ci/generated/security-preflight.mjs workflow --workflow codeql
  node scripts/ci/generated/security-preflight.mjs workflow --workflow scorecard
  node scripts/ci/generated/security-preflight.mjs workflow --workflow dependency-review

Local execution needs Bun and the project's Civet dependency; authenticated
local API checks also require the GitHub CLI (gh). The local hook uses the
canonical typed source at scripts/ci/security-preflight.civet.

Only GitHub Actions executes scripts/ci/generated/security-preflight.mjs. This
generated Node artifact is a compatibility exception for dependency-free
workflow bootstrap and uses Node built-ins only; it is not the primary local
entry point. Change the canonical Civet source and regenerate the artifact;
never hand-edit the generated Node artifact.

Trusted hosted helper and adoption order

On pull requests, execute the generated Node helper from the exact trusted PR
base SHA, never the pull request's helper code. A missing trusted base artifact
is a hard failure, not permission to fall back to the PR copy.

Before adopting successor workflows in a repository whose base lacks the helper,
merge a helper-only bootstrap PR containing the canonical source and generated
Node artifact under unchanged baseline workflows and protections. Base the
successor-adoption PR on that merged commit. Do not weaken required checks or
use an administrative bypass to break this dependency. Preserve all five
Verification contexts and protected CodeQL Actions/JavaScript and Dependency
Review checks throughout adoption.

Prerequisites and credentials

Authenticate gh for github.com before using the local check. The active account
or token must be able to read the destination repository's metadata, the
requested security capabilities, and the repository's Actions variables. Local
policy variables are read from that destination repository through gh, not
inferred from local environment values or from a different remote. A successful
gh login alone does not prove that these repository reads are permitted. Grant
only the read access needed for the checks; the preflight needs no settings
write access and never asks for secrets values.

In each hosted workflow, pass the workflow token and all three policy values
explicitly through the step environment:

  GH_TOKEN: ${{ github.token }}
  DF_CODEQL_ENABLED: ${{ vars.DF_CODEQL_ENABLED }}
  DF_CODE_SCANNING_UPLOAD_ENABLED: ${{ vars.DF_CODE_SCANNING_UPLOAD_ENABLED }}
  DF_DEPENDENCY_REVIEW_ENABLED: ${{ vars.DF_DEPENDENCY_REVIEW_ENABLED }}

GITHUB_REPOSITORY is supplied automatically by GitHub Actions. Workflow policy
values come from the vars context; do not put them in secrets or fetch Actions
variables using the workflow token. The token still needs the read permissions
for the metadata and requested feature probes. Any later SARIF upload needs its
own applicable token permissions; a successful read-only preflight cannot
promise those permissions.

Policy variables and truth table

The only policy variables are:

  DF_CODEQL_ENABLED
    Requests CodeQL analysis.

  DF_CODE_SCANNING_UPLOAD_ENABLED
    Requests upload of code-scanning results, independently of CodeQL analysis.

  DF_DEPENDENCY_REVIEW_ENABLED
    Requests dependency review.

Values are exact, lowercase strings: true or false. A missing variable and an
empty string mean unset. Other values are invalid and fail the relevant check;
there is no case folding or truthiness conversion. Each workflow validates only
the variables relevant to its scope.

For EACH applicable capability:

  Verified visibility   Variable value      Policy decision
  -------------------   -----------------   ---------------------------------
  Public                missing or empty    Enabled; verify capability
  Public                true                Enabled; verify capability
  Public                false               Enabled; verify capability
  Private               true                Enabled; verify capability
  Private               false               NOT CONFIGURED; do not run
  Private               missing or empty    NOT CONFIGURED; do not run
  Either                any other value     FAILED; block
  Unknown/unverified    any value           FAILED; never publish

Public repositories always retain the enabled security defaults, including
when a policy variable is false. The variables are private-repository opt-ins,
not a way to disable public protections. Every private capability must have its
own explicit true value; opting into one does not opt into another.

An enabled policy decision is a request, not proof of authorization. Requested
capabilities must pass their probes. In particular, private CodeQL requires
verified capability/entitlement even when code-scanning upload is disabled.
Disabling upload does not authorize private CodeQL analysis.

Public and private repositories use the same scoped capability probes for
enabled checks: code-scanning reads and dependency comparison against a known
commit SHA, as applicable. Public visibility is not a shortcut around those
reads. A successful HTTP 200 response containing an empty result array is valid;
prior analysis results are not required. Authentication, permission, 404,
network, and malformed-response failures still block.

Scopes and outputs

The codeql workflow checks CodeQL and code-scanning upload only. The scorecard
workflow checks code-scanning upload only. The dependency-review workflow checks
dependency review only. A flag or feature belonging solely to another scope
must not disable or block an unrelated workflow.

The workflow interface always emits safe boolean strings for these outputs:

  codeql_enabled
  upload_enabled
  dependency_review_enabled
  publish_results

Only the literal string true enables a corresponding downstream operation.
Unused or unverified outputs do not grant authorization. In workflow conditions,
compare enabled outputs explicitly with == 'true'; do not rely on string
truthiness. In particular, an empty publish_results output after an interrupted
or failed step must not cause publication.

Status and failure handling

AUTHORIZED means the capability was requested by policy and its read-only
capability check succeeded. It is not legal advice, a completed security scan,
or a guarantee that a later upload will succeed.

NOT CONFIGURED means a private capability has no explicit true opt-in. It is
not run. This is an intentional policy state, not an authorization failure and
not a passing security result. Summaries must keep that distinction visible.

FAILED means the check could not establish a safe result or a requested
capability was unavailable. Unknown repository metadata, authentication or
permission errors, HTTP 404 responses, other API errors, network failures,
malformed responses or flag values, and exceeded request or pagination limits
block the affected check and produce a nonzero exit. A 404 is not evidence of a
private repository, an unset variable, or a harmless optional feature. Do not
convert API errors to NOT CONFIGURED or assume unknown visibility is public.

Do not mask failures with continue-on-error, unconditional success fallbacks,
or shell commands that discard the failing exit status. Diagnose access or
configuration through the explicit summary without printing tokens, secrets,
raw repository metadata, or raw API response bodies.

Scorecard behavior

Free Scorecard analysis always runs, including on private repositories and when
its capability step fails. Preserve its result artifact when analysis produces
one, and leave the capability step red; running analysis is not permission to
hide a failed security check. Scorecard analysis has no private opt-in variable.

Only a verified public repository may set publish_results=true and publish
Scorecard results. Private repositories remain analysis-and-artifact-only for
Scorecard publication, even if a private upload capability is authorized.
Unknown metadata never enables publication. Code-scanning SARIF upload is a
separate operation gated by upload_enabled; do not confuse it with Scorecard
public result publication.

Fork pull requests commonly have restricted write tokens. Successful metadata
and feature reads do not remove those restrictions. A later upload that fails
because the token lacks write permission must still propagate that failure;
the preflight does not suppress it or claim upload success in advance.

Analysis and artifact retention

CodeQL analysis uses upload: never; a separate step ingests SARIF only when
upload_enabled is true. Disabled ingestion does not disable otherwise authorized
analysis or authorize private CodeQL use. Every authorized upload must succeed.
Retain generated CodeQL and Scorecard SARIF artifacts for exactly seven days;
artifact upload failures block. An artifact is evidence of output, not
successful ingestion.

Read-only resource bounds

The checks are bounded, not open-ended discovery:

  Per request timeout:                    20 seconds
  Per request response limit:             1 MiB
  Local Actions variable page size:       100
  Maximum local variable pages:           10
  Overall preflight deadline:             120 seconds

An incomplete or truncated response is not authorization. Pagination is bounded
to 1,000 variables; inability to establish a complete result within the limits
fails rather than silently treating unseen variables as unset. The overall
deadline applies even if individual requests have time remaining.

These checks only read metadata, variables, and feature availability. They do
not purchase a subscription, start a trial, enable a feature, change repository
settings or visibility, or modify permissions. Any such administrative choice
requires a separate, deliberate action by an authorized operator.

CodeQL licensing

Public visibility and a feature probe are not substitutes for reading the
CodeQL license. The standard CodeQL terms describe permitted uses, including
conditions for Open Source Codebases and automated analysis. Private CodeQL
analysis requires appropriate paid customer authorization; an opt-in variable,
a reachable API, or upload=false does not supply that authorization.

Repository administrators must confirm the applicable paid customer license
and permitted use before opting private code into CodeQL. A feature probe can
check technical availability; it cannot interpret a contract or establish all
legal rights. This preflight is not legal advice.

Authoritative references:

  GitHub CodeQL Terms and Conditions:
  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/github/codeql-cli-binaries/main/LICENSE.md

  About the CodeQL CLI:
  https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/codeql-cli/getting-started-with-the-codeql-cli/about-the-codeql-cli

Local CI and preflight gating

The pre-push hook binds Git's actual destination and every non-deletion pushed
ref to current HEAD and requires clean source before destination-scoped
security preflight. After preflight passes, it runs immutable verify:core,
verify:coverage, verify:integration, verify:graph, and verify:browser
sequentially. The first failed preflight or lane blocks publication without
running the remaining lanes. Success requires all five lanes to pass and a
final check that HEAD is unchanged and source is still clean. Missing
prerequisites, stale generated evidence, or detected source mutation blocks
publication. There is no core-only path, environment-heavy deferral, or bypass.

An explicitly unconfigured private licensed capability is reported as not
configured/not run and is not treated as successful analysis. Any actual
security-preflight failure blocks the push; local lane results cannot erase it.

Local execution cannot reproduce hosted GitHub Actions exactly: event context,
runner environment, repository settings, credentials, and token permissions
can differ or change after the check. The preflight verifies only the bounded,
read-only facts available at check time. It cannot guarantee a later hosted
analysis, publication, or code-scanning upload will succeed.
